feat: GAC (RBAC) documentation (#699)
appsmithorg/appsmith-docs: website/docs/advanced-concepts/access-control/roles.md

# Roles

>  A Role is a collection of permissions that defines access for entities or resources which can be further assigned to a user or a group. Roles allow you to adjust multiple permissions rather than assigning individual permissions to users/groups. In Appsmith, a role can contain multiple permissions and a permission can be present in multiple roles. However, a role can't be nested, i.e, it can contain only permissions, not other roles. 

Reviewer: It sounds a bit confusing to me, as roles will also define actions that users can take and not just access right. Can we rewrite it like as below:
```suggestion
 In Granular Access Control (GAC), a role is a defined set of permissions that can be assigned to a user or group of users. These permissions determine the actions that can be performed on specific entities or resources. By using roles, you can manage multiple permissions at once rather than managing them individually. In Appsmith, a role can be mapped to multiple permissions, and single permission can be mapped to multiple roles. However, a role cannot be nested, meaning that it exists as a standalone entity with its own defined set of permissions. Roles are useful for efficiently managing access and permissions within your Appsmith account.
```

Author: Thanks @jnikhila . Permission defines access to the actions that a user can take. They do not define the actions directly but give access to a user to perform certain actions. Also, just for consistency with the UI, let's keep it as "assigned to a user or a group."

Reviewer 2: Ok here let's avoid 'actions' and use 'operations' instead . Yes agree it need to be clear . suggestion below including some points shared by Nikhila above

```suggestion
A Role is a collection of permissions that grant access to perform certain operations on resources and can be assigned to a user or a group. Roles enable users to manage multiple permissions rather than assigning individual permissions to users/groups. In Appsmith, a role can be mapped to multiple permissions and a permission can be mapped to multiple roles. However, a role cannot be nested, i.e. it can contain only permissions and not other roles. Roles are useful to provide fine-grained access and for managing permissions on Appsmith resources.
```

>  In an Appsmith instance, there are three roles available by default -

Reviewer: Let's not include numbers, we can just say below or following instead. Also, do we need to add `Instance` here?

Author: Yes, we need to mention it here as all of this will happen on an instance

Reviewer: > I think we should mention the three roles thing because then we want to inform that GAC allows users to assign a custom role beyond these three.
> 
> Also give a screenshot here so users know exactly where they will be able to assign this. <img alt="Screenshot 2022-12-23 at 11 21 32" width="374" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32227135/209279437-4ce4bc4b-aa33-4cdf-b09f-df83680311d2.png">

We should not use numbers to refer to default roles because we may add more roles to the default list in the future. The phrase 'by default' means that these roles are currently available, and three of them exist.

 1. **Admin**
 2. **Developer**
 3. **App Viewer**

## Resource

> When you open a role, the permissions are divided into different tabs based on the resource they affect. Currently, there are four resources -

Reviewer: Here we should introduce `Resource` as a concept and then give a one-liner definition for each. Something like below:

A resource refer to specific components or aspects of an application that can be accessed or modified by users. These resources may include individual pages or views within the application, specific data sets or database tables, or specific actions or functions that can be performed within the application. In Appsmith, resources are classified into the following categories:

App Resources: These are resources related to the applications built in Appsmith, such as individual pages or views within the application.
Datasource and Queries: These are resources related to databases or queries created in Appsmith, such as a MongoDB setup used as a data source.
Groups and Roles: These are resources related to the roles available for each workspace in Appsmith. For example, if you have two workspaces - HR and Finance - then roles related to HR and finance would be available.
Others: These are resources related to workspaces and audit logs in Appsmith.

Author: Thanks @jnikhila , I was yet to work on this. This helps a lot!

1. App Resources 
2. Datasource and queries
3. Groups and Roles
4. Others

```
raw lines - On the roles configuration screen under the App resources tab, you'll get a dropdown list of all the workspaces on your instance.
```

## Permissions

 A permission is the ability to perform a specific action on a resource. Multiple permissions can be clubbed under a role and a permission can be present in multiple roles. The table below lists all the permissions available in Appsmith -

> |  Permissions       |    Description                                                     |   Resource   |

Reviewer: @Pranay105 - Please changes this to replace '/' with ','.

#### Create

`Create` gives the ability to create applications in a workspace, pages of an application or actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects) in a page. In App resources, you can give the create permission at different hierarchical levels -

##### Workspace 

If you give create permission to the workspace, it gives access to create applications in the respective workspace.

:::note
Under App resources, you can only define access for the applications in a workspace. To have access for the workspace itself, go to [others](#others-permissions) tab and check the permission adjacent to workspace.
:::

:::info
Giving `Create` permission to a workspace has a cascading effect, i.e, it gives create, edit, view, delete permission to all the applications in the workspace. 
:::

##### Application

If you want the user to have create access only to a specific application in a workspace, open the respective workspace's dropdown and check the create permission adjacent to the respective application. `Create` for just an application allows you to create resources like pages, actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects). 

##### Page

> Going granular, you can give `create` access to a page in an application. It allows you to create resources like APIs, queries, JSObjects for one page.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At a more granular level, you can restrict **Create** permission to a specific page and its resources within an application by checking the box next to the page name.
```

#### Edit

> `Edit` allows the user to change/ modify the existing applications, pages, or actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects) in a workspace. You can edit the app name, pages, and their order, color, icon, theme etc. Edit also gives you the access for deploying an app and connecting to your Git repository. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Edit** allows the user to modify the existing applications, pages, database/API queries and JS Objects in a workspace. You can edit the app name, pages, and their order, color, icon, theme etc. Edit also enables access to deploy an app and connect to a Git repository. 
```

Just a doubt, is the Edit permission the one that controls access for deploying an app and connecting to Git, or the create permission on that workspace itself

Author: Create permission has a cascading effect. If you check create, it gives create, edit, view, delete permissions too. Create will have all the access that relates to the other 3, Edit will give this specific access.

> Edit permission can be given at different hierarchical levels -

Reviewer 2: Similar suggestions as on Create for each level

Delete permission behaves differently at various hierarchical levels -

##### Workspace 

 If you give delete permission to the workspace, It gives access to remove any application from the respective workspace. 

##### Application

If you want the user to have delete access only to a specific application in a workspace, open the respective workspace's dropdown and check the delete permission adjacent to the respective application. `Delete` for just an application allows you to delete resources like page, actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects).

##### Page

`Delete` access for a particular page allows you to delete the respective page or the resources in the page like APIs, queries, JSObjects. 

#### Export

`Export` allows a user to export the applications in a workspace. If a user has export permission enabled, he can also view the applications in the workspace.
This permission can also be enabled for a particular application, allowing the user to export and view the respective application only.

#### Make public

`Make Public` gives the user an ability to make the application public or private in a workspace.

> ### Datasource and queries permissions

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Datasources & Queries permissions
```

Author: Aren't we following the sentence case heading rule?

For datasource and queries, here are the permissions that can be assigned to user or a group -

#### Execute

> `Execute` gives a user the ability to execute the datasource. This permission can be given for a workspace or a particular datasource in the workspace.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**Execute** gives a user permission to run DB/API queries created on a datasource. This permission can be given for a workspace or for an individual datasource in a workspace.
```

##### Workspace

> Giving execute permission at a workspace level allows the user to execute any datasource in the workspace.

Reviewer 2: its not permission to execute a datasource. It is permission to execute queries in a datasource

Author: That's the catch here. It gives you access to execute the datasource. For access to execute queries, you have to go to the page level and give execute access to the specific query.
Execute permission at a workspace level is required for a query to work, but you must also enable execute access on the query itself.

# Roles
 A Role is a collection of permissions that grant access to perform certain operations on resources and can be assigned to a user or a group. Roles enable users to manage multiple permissions rather than assigning individual permissions to users/groups. In Appsmith, a role can be mapped to multiple permissions and a permission can be mapped to multiple roles. However, a role cannot be nested, i.e. it can contain only permissions and not other roles. Roles are useful for efficiently managing permissions to access Appsmith resources.
 

>  Appsmith provides three built-in roles - **Admin**, **Developer** and **App Viewer**.  With GAC, you can create a custom role that provides fine-grained access control. 

Reviewer 3: should we rename **Admin** to **Administrator**?
<img width="645" alt="image" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/28362912/209928675-832b5edf-c023-4e3f-adf0-142ee86d1980.png">

Also, should we write the full form of GAC the first time we are using it and then mention its short form in bracket?

## Resources

A resource refers to specific components or aspects of an application that can be accessed or modified by users. These resources may include individual pages or views within the application, specific data sets or database tables, or specific actions or functions that can be performed within the application. In Appsmith, resources are classified into the following categories:

> * **App Resources:** These are resources related to the applications built in Appsmith, such as individual pages or views within the application.

Reviewer 3: Should we rename  **App Resources:** to **Application resources:**

* **Datasource and Queries:** These are resources related to databases or queries created in Appsmith, such as a MongoDB setup used as a data source.

> * **Groups and Roles:** These are resources related to the roles available for the workspaces in an Appsmith instance . For example, if you have two workspaces - HR and Finance - then roles related to HR and finance would be available.

Reviewer 3: Nit: `Appsmith instance .` space between content and full stop

> * **Others:** These are resources related to workspaces and audit logs in Appsmith.

Reviewer 3: Should we mention that the remaining resources come here instead of mentioning workspaces and audit logs? Asking because if we add new things on this page in future then we would also need update on the docs.

Author: I think for now we should mention what's there in others. When we add more things, we'll changes it in the docs.

##### Application

You can restrict access to specific applications and their resources in a workspace by checking the box next to the application name.

##### Page

At a more granular level, you can restrict **Create** permission to a specific page and its resources within an application by checking the box next to the page name.

#### Edit

**Edit** allows the user to modify the existing applications, pages, database/API queries and JS Objects in a workspace. You can edit the app name, pages, and their order, color, icon, theme etc. Edit also enables access to deploy an app and connect to a Git repository. 
Edit permission can be given at different hierarchical levels -

##### Workspace 

When you grant the **Create** permission to a workspace, it provides access to edit resources only in that particular workspace. This also automatically enables permission to view, edit the existing pages, database/API queries and JS Objects.

##### Application

> If you want the user to have edit access only to a specific application in a workspace, open the respective workspace dropdown and check the edit permission adjacent to the respective application. **Edit** for just an application allows you to edit resources like page, actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects), Git connection etc. 

Reviewer 3: workspace `tree`

Reviewer 3: **Edit** for just an application allows you to edit resources like page, actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects), Git connection etc. `inside that application`

##### Page

At a more granular level, you can restrict **Edit** permission to a specific page and its resources within an application by checking the box next to the page name. You can edit the page name, clone the page, set it as the home page, and toggle their visibility.

> 

Reviewer 3: Edit exists for queries, APIs & JS objects as well

#### View 

**View** only grants a user the access to view and interact with the deployed applications in a workspace. You can't make any changes as you won't be able to access the canvas if you only have the View permission. It applies to all the hierarchical levels in a workspace.

#### Delete

**Delete** gives the user an access to delete the existing applications, pages, or actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects) in a workspace. With the delete permission, one can't edit or create resources, but, the user has the access to delete it.

Delete permission behaves differently at various hierarchical levels -

##### Workspace 

 If you give delete permission to the workspace, It gives access to remove any application from the respective workspace. 

##### Application

> If you want the user to have delete access only to a specific application in a workspace, open the respective workspace's dropdown and check the delete permission adjacent to the respective application. **Delete** for just an application allows you to delete resources like page, actions (APIs, queries, JSObjects).

Reviewer 3: workspace's `tree`

##### Page

**Delete** access for a particular page allows you to delete the respective page or the resources in the page like APIs, queries, JSObjects. 

#### Export

**Export** allows a user to export the applications in a workspace. If a user has export permission enabled, he can also view the applications in the workspace.
This permission can also be enabled for a particular application, allowing the user to export and view the respective application only.

#### Make public

> **Make Public** gives the user an ability to make the application public or private in a workspace.

Reviewer 3: Same like export, make public gives view access as well

Author: As discussed, we'll just mention what this permission does and not the cascading effect it has.

### Datasource and queries permissions

For datasource and queries, here are the permissions that can be assigned to user or a group -

#### Execute

**Execute** gives a user permission to run DB/API queries created on a datasource. This permission can be given for a workspace or for an individual datasource in a workspace.

##### Workspace

Giving execute permission at a workspace level allows the user to execute any datasource in the workspace.

##### Datasource

> If you want the user to have execute access only to a specific datasource in a workspace, open the respective workspace's dropdown and check the execute permission adjacent to the respective datasource. **Execute** for a specific datasource allows the user to execute only that datasource.

Reviewer 3: respective workspace's `tree`

##### Page

Going further down the hierarchy, you can give execute access to the queries inside a page. Execute permission at this stage allows the user to run the respective query. Execute permission for a query in page only works if the corresponding datasource also has the execute access.

#### Create

**Create** gives the ability to create datasources in a workspace. In Datasource and queries, you can give the create permission at different hierarchical levels -

##### Workspace

If you give create permission to the workspace, it gives access to create datasources in the respective workspace. This also automatically enables permission to create, edit, view, delete  all the datasources in the workspace.

> 

Reviewer 3: and execute access for the datasource

##### Datasource

> If you want the user to have create access only to a specific datasource in a workspace, open the respective workspace dropdown and check the create permission adjacent to the respective datasource. **Create** for a particular datasource allows the user to make tweaks the datasource configurations and further test, delete or save it.

Reviewer 3: workspace `tree`

You can't create queries for a datasource by giving create access for the datasources in the workspace. To create new queries, check the create permissions under [Application resources permissions](#app-resources-permissions) 

> 

Reviewer 3: you need create on datasource + create on [Application resources permissions](#app-resources-permissions) for creating queries using the datasource

#### Edit 

**Edit** allows the user to change/modify the existing datasources. You can edit the datasource name, configurations and further test and save the datasource. Edit permission can be given at different hierarchical levels -

##### Workspace

If you give edit permission to the workspace, it gives access to modify all the datasources in the respective workspace. This also automatically enables permission to edit, view, all the datasources in the workspace.

> 

Reviewer 3: + execute access

##### Datasource

> If you want the user to have edit access only to a specific datasource in a workspace, open the respective workspace dropdown and check the edit permission adjacent to the respective datasource. **Edit** for just a datasource allows you to modify the name, configurations of that datasource.

Reviewer 3: workspace `tree`

#### View

**View** only allows a user to have view access for the existing datasources. The user can interact with the functionality of the datasource, test the datasource, but can't make any changes with View permission. View permission can be given at different hierarchical levels -

##### Workspace

If you give view permission to the workspace, it gives access to view and execute all the datasources in the respective workspace.

##### Datasource 

> If you want the user to have view access only to a specific datasource in a workspace, open the respective workspace's dropdown and check the view permission adjacent to the respective datasource. **View** for just a datasource allows you to view, test and execute that datasource.

Reviewer 3: workspace `tree`

#### Delete

**Delete** gives the user an access to delete the existing datasources in a workspace. With the delete permission, one can't edit or create a datasource, but, the user has the access to delete it.
Delete permission can be given at various hierarchical levels - 

##### Workspace

If you give delete permission to the workspace, It gives access to remove any datasource from the respective workspace. 

##### Datasource

**Delete** for a particular datasource allows you to remove that datasource only.

### Groups and roles permissions

For Groups and roles for an Appsmith instance, here are the permissions that can be assigned to user or a group -

#### Create

With this permission, users can create new groups and roles. 

##### Groups

When the create permission is enabled for groups, a user can create a new group. This also automatically enables permission to view, edit, delete, invite, or remove a user from an existing group.

##### Roles

With create permission enables for roles, a user can create a new role. This also automatically enables permission to view, edit, delete, the existing roles.

> 

Reviewer 3: Also enables the associate role permission

Author: Removing the UX impact as discussed on the call.

#### Edit 

With this permission, users can edit the existing groups and roles. 

##### Groups

When the edit permission is enabled for groups, a user can edit an existing group. This also automatically enables permission to view, edit, invite, or remove a user from an existing groups

##### Roles

With edit permission enables for roles, a user can modify an existing role. This also automatically enables permission to edit, view an existing role or assign an associate role.

:::info

You can't edit the built-in roles from Appsmith. You can only the edit the custom roles defined by any user in your instance.
:::

#### View

With this permission, users can only view the existing groups and roles.

#### Delete

> This permission grants users to delete and view the existing groups and roles.

Reviewer 3: And enables associate role

:::info

You can't delete the built-in roles from Appsmith. You can only the delete the custom roles defined by any user in your instance.
:::

#### Invite Users

This permission grants the user the access to invite users to a group.

#### Remove User

This permission grants the user the access to remove users from a group.

#### Associate Role

With this permission, a user has the access to assign the roles to other users on the instance. Associate role permission restricts a user from creating new roles or, editing, viewing, and deleting the existing ones, but, they can assign the existing roles to various users on the instance.

> 

Reviewer 3: Associate role permission,`if provided alone`, restricts a user from creating new roles or, editing,.....

### Others permissions

In this section, a user can assign permissions for workspaces and Audit logs.

#### Workspace

> Workspace level permissions enables a user to perform actions on the workspaces itself. You can create new workspace or edit, delete, view the existing ones.

Reviewer 3: in others tab, for existing workspace we have only edit & delete permissions.
CC: @trishaanand
